feat: create listbox primitive package (#2928)
twilio-labs/paste: packages/paste-website/src/pages/primitives/listbox-primitive/index.mdx

        slug
        title
      }
      headings {
        depth
        value
      }
    }
    allAirtable(filter: {data: {Feature: {eq: "Listbox Primitive"}}}) {
      edges {
        node {
          data {
            Documentation
            Figma
            Design_committee_review
            Engineer_committee_review
            Code
            status
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
`;

<NormalizedComponentHeader
  categoryRoute={SidebarCategoryRoutes.PRIMITIVES}
  githubUrl="https://github.com/twilio-labs/paste/tree/main/packages/paste-core/primitives/listbox"
  storybookUrl="/?path=/story/primitives-listbox--vertical-listbox"
  data={props.data}
/>

---

<contentwrapper>

<PageAside data={props.data.mdx} />

<content>

<LivePreview
  scope={{
    useListboxPrimitiveState,
    ListboxPrimitive,
    ListboxPrimitiveItem,
    Stack,
  }}
  noInline
  showOverflow
>
  {defaultExample}
</LivePreview>

## Guidelines

### About the Listbox Primitive

The Listbox primitive is an unstyled, functional version of a listbox component. It can be used to build a component following the [WAI-ARIA Listbox Pattern](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/listbox/).

> This unstyled primitive is to be used when the styled Listbox provided by Paste doesn&rsquo;t meet the requirements needed to solve a unique customer problem. At that point, you are welcome to fall back to this functional primitive to roll your own styled Listbox while still providing a functional and accessible experience to your customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This unstyled primitive is to be used when the listbox components, like FormPillGroup, provided by Paste don&rsquo;t meet the requirements needed to solve a unique customer problem. At that point, you are welcome to fall back to this functional primitive to roll your own styled Listbox while still providing a functional and accessible experience to your customers.
```

The `onSelect` event handler will fire whenever the item is clicked, or the spacebar or enter key is pressed. Use this to respond to your users' selection interactions.

### Horizontal Listbox

<LivePreview
  scope={{
    useListboxPrimitiveState,
    ListboxPrimitive,
    ListboxPrimitiveItem,
  }}
  noInline
  showOverflow
>
  {horizontalExample}
</LivePreview>

### Listbox with groups

<LivePreview
  scope={{
    useListboxPrimitiveState,
    ListboxPrimitive,
    ListboxPrimitiveGroup,
    ListboxPrimitiveItem,
    Stack,
  }}
  noInline
  showOverflow
>
  {groupsExample}
</LivePreview>

### Multiselect Listbox

<LivePreview
  scope={{
    useListboxPrimitiveState,
    ListboxPrimitive,
    ListboxPrimitiveItem,
  }}
  noInline
  showOverflow
>
  {multipleExample}
</LivePreview>

> ### Dual Listboxes

Reviewer: Suggestion: can you add an explanation for why we have this example? Something like
> Listboxes can be used in any situation where a user needs to select items in a list or rearrange a list. One example is a UI where users need to move items between two lists like this:

This primitive should be used to compose all custom Listboxes to ensure accessibility and upgrade paths.

<Callout variant="warning" marginY="space70">
  <CalloutHeading as="h3">Before you roll your own listboxes...</CalloutHeading>
  <CalloutText>
    We strongly suggest that all components built on top of this primitive get reviewed by the Design Systems team and
    go through the UX Review process to ensure an excellent experience for our customers.
  </CalloutText>
</Callout>

## Examples

### Selection

To make items inside the Listbox selectable, you can manage the selection state yourself and combine it with the state returned from the `useListboxPrimitiveState` hook. To do so, track which item is selected in a separate store of state. When rendering the Listbox, cross reference the rendered items with the selection state, and conditionally set `selected` on each `ListboxPrimitiveItem` that requires it.

The `onSelect` event handler will fire whenever the item is clicked, or the spacebar or enter key is pressed. Use this to respond to your users' selection interactions.

### Horizontal Listbox

> 

Reviewer 2: suggestion: I think this could use a little copy of how you make it into a horizontal listbox, something like "Our listbox is vertical by default. To change it to horizontal, specify the orientation when initializing the state with` useListboxPrimitiveState({orientation: 'horizontal'}`."

<LivePreview
  scope={{
    useListboxPrimitiveState,
    ListboxPrimitive,
    ListboxPrimitiveItem,
  }}
  noInline
  showOverflow
>
  {horizontalExample}
</LivePreview>

### Listbox with groups

> 

Reviewer 2: suggestion: same here about the copy. Not everyone reading this is familiar with code, so a little English to introduce the concept goes a long way. "Use `ListboxPrimitiveGroup` to create different groupings within the same listbox"

<LivePreview
  scope={{
    useListboxPrimitiveState,
    ListboxPrimitive,
    ListboxPrimitiveGroup,
    ListboxPrimitiveItem,
    Stack,
  }}
  noInline
  showOverflow
>
  {groupsExample}
</LivePreview>

### Multiselect Listbox

> 

Reviewer 2: suggestion: same as the other two 😅

This primitive should be used to compose all custom Listboxes to ensure accessibility and upgrade paths.

<Callout variant="warning" marginY="space70">
  <CalloutHeading as="h3">Before you roll your own listboxes...</CalloutHeading>
  <CalloutText>
    We strongly suggest that all components built on top of this primitive get reviewed by the Design Systems team and
    go through the UX Review process to ensure an excellent experience for our customers.
  </CalloutText>
</Callout>

## Examples

### Selection

To make items inside the Listbox selectable, you can manage the selection state yourself and combine it with the state returned from the `useListboxPrimitiveState` hook. To do so, track which item is selected in a separate store of state. When rendering the Listbox, cross reference the rendered items with the selection state, and conditionally set `selected` on each `ListboxPrimitiveItem` that requires it.

The `onSelect` event handler will fire whenever the item is clicked, or the spacebar or enter key is pressed. Use this to respond to your users' selection interactions.

> ### Horizontal Listbox

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Horizontal alignment
```

Reviewer 3: I'm suggesting this @Niznikr because of how we've referred to this in some previous components, check out radio group: https://paste.twilio.design/components/radio-group/#horizontal-alignment

<LivePreview
  scope={{
    useListboxPrimitiveState,
    ListboxPrimitive,
    ListboxPrimitiveGroup,
    ListboxPrimitiveItem,
    Stack,
  }}
  noInline
  showOverflow
>
  {groupsExample}
</LivePreview>

### Multiselect Listbox

Our listbox is set for single selection by default. To change it to allow multiple selections, specify the variant as `multiple` on `ListboxPrimitive`:

<LivePreview
  scope={{
    useListboxPrimitiveState,
    ListboxPrimitive,
    ListboxPrimitiveItem,
  }}
  noInline
  showOverflow
>
  {multipleExample}
</LivePreview>

### Dual Listboxes

Listboxes can be used in any situation where a user needs to select items in a list or rearrange a list. One example is a UI where users need to move items between two lists like this:

<LivePreview
  scope={{
    useListboxPrimitiveState,
    ListboxPrimitive,
    ListboxPrimitiveItem,
    Box,
    Button,
    CheckboxCheckIcon,
    PlusIcon,
    MinusIcon,
    Column,
    Grid,
    Stack,
  }}
  noInline
  showOverflow
>
  {dualExample}
</LivePreview>

### Custom styling

You can provide custom styling to the primitive listbox by utilizing the `as` prop on each component.

> The listbox primitive does not come with any styling, and thus you could mix the functionality of it with another component by using the _as_ prop. By doing so, you can get styling from another component, and listbox functionality from this primitive.

Reviewer 3: Question (non-blocking): Why is the "as" prop italicized here? Should it be a lil code snippet?

Author: Yeah can update in a follow-up!

Because these are not styled, rendering any of them _as_ another component you can mix the functionality of two components together. Styling from one, listbox functionlity from the primitive component.

In the example below, we import the Paste Button `import {Button} from '@twilio-paste/button';` and use it as the Listbox items via the `as` prop.

<LivePreview
  scope={{
    useListboxPrimitiveState,
    ListboxPrimitive,
    ListboxPrimitiveItem,
    Button,
    Stack,
    CheckboxCheckIcon,
  }}
  noInline
  showOverflow
>
  {customExample}
</LivePreview>

---

## Usage Guide

> This package is a wrapper around the [Reakit Composite](https://reakit.io/docs/composite/). If you’re wondering why we wrapped that package into our own, we reasoned that it would be best for our consumers’ developer experience. For example:

Reviewer 3: Maybe this could be shortened up a bit:

"This package is a wrapper around the Reakit Composite, as we believe it's best for our consumers' developer experience. For example:"

- We can control which APIs we expose. For example, we may chose to enable or disable usage of certain undocumented APIs.

### API

#### Installation

```bash
yarn add @twilio-paste/listbox-primitve - or - yarn add @twilio-paste/core
```

#### Props

This props list is a scoped version of the properties available from the [Reakit Composite](https://reakit.io/docs/composite/) package.

##### useListboxPrimitiveState

| Prop           | Type                         | Description                                            | Default     |
| -------------- | ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ | ----------- |
| `baseId?`      | `string`                     | ID that will serve as a base for all the items IDs     |             |
| `rtl?`         | `boolean`                    | Determines how next and previous functions will behave |             |
| `orientation?` | `"horizontal" \| "vertical"` | Defines the orientation of the listbox                 | "vertical"` |
| `currentId?`   | `string`                     | The current focused item id                            |             |

##### ListboxPrimitive

> **Note:** Most required props are provided by spreading the returned state from `useListboxPrimitiveState`.

Reviewer 3: Question (non-blocking): Should this be a neutral callout?

Author: Not sure! Copied what was done in other primitives.

| `currentId?`   | `string`                                                | The current focused item id                                                                                                                            |             |
| `groups?`      | `Group[]`                                               | Lists all the composite groups with their id and DOM ref. It is updated when registerGroup and unregisterGroup are called.                             |             |
| `orientation?` | `"horizontal" \| "vertical"`                            | Defines the orientation of the listbox                                                                                                                 | "vertical"` |
| `variant?`     | `"single" \| "multiple"`                                | Defines the selection mode of the listbox                                                                                                              | "single"`   |

##### ListboxPrimitiveGroup

No props to show

##### ListboxPrimitiveItem

> **Note:** Most required props are provided by spreading the returned state from `useListboxPrimitiveState`.

Reviewer 3: Question (non-blocking): Should this also be a neutral callout?

Author: Not sure! Copied what was done in other primitives.
